v4 preview release (#291)
OceanParcels/oceanparcels_website: src/posts/parcels-v4preview/index.md

Reviewer: We should refer to this version as `v4.0` instead of `v4-preview` or `v4.0-preview`. We should also capitalise package names (Xarray, Python, Zarr, Dask etc.)

Author: I see the point about capitalising package names (and have done so in f78bef07cd51b0d67cdbe624834fa02bc41d0090), but I don't entirely understand why we shouldn't call it v4.0-preview. I actually like that name; it signals clearly to our users that this is not the stable version yet. If we simply call it v4.0, then users won't know it's unstable...

Reviewer: Because I think its quite confusing:
- `v4.0-preview` hints that there will be a `v4.0` release later which will be stable, when that's not the case - there may be several "preview" releases until we get to the stable `v4.x` version
- users never actually install `v4.0-preview`, they install `v4.0`. Conda nor PyPI support "preview" in the version name, "preview" is only shown when we talk about it - which I find unnecessarily confusing

I think it makes a lot more sense to say that it's v4.0 - which is treated as a preview release of Parcels to get early user feedback. I think mentioning this in the blog post, the tagged release, and on import (even as a banner in the docs we could do) is good and clearly communicated.

Perhaps there is something to be said about the paper. It would be cleaner to reference the stable version as `v4.0.0`, but that's just not an option if we go for this approach of doing preview releases that people get when they do `conda install parcels`.

---
title: 'Parcels v4.0-preview is available! 🚀'

> date: '2026-08-01'

Author: This is a placeholder for now; will need to adapt this to the actual release date

authors:
  - name: Erik van Sebille
    github: erikvansebille
  - name: Nick Hodgskin
    github: VeckotheGecko
  - name: Joe Schoonover
    github: fluidnumericsJoe
summary: 'Parcels v4.0-preview is now available, bringing exciting new features and improvements to the Parcels framework.'
---

We are very excited to announce that Parcels v4-preview is now available for performing Lagrangian simulations in hydrodynamic flows. Parcels v4 is a complete redesign of the [Parcels code](https://parcels-code.org) and is designed to be more flexible and extensible than previous versions.

> Parcels v4 is pure python code, so that it can leverage the full power of the [Pangeo ecosystem](https://pangeo.io/) of geoscience python tools such as xarray, dask and zarr. Particle advection and interpolation are now vectorised operations, which improves performance and makes [particle-particle interactions](https://docs.parcels-code.org/en/main/user_guide/examples/tutorial_interaction.html) easier to implement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this release - Parcels is a pure Python package that leverages the full power of the [Pangeo ecosystem](https://pangeo.io/) of geoscience python tools such as xarray, dask and zarr. Particle advection and interpolation are now vectorised operations, which improves performance and makes [particle-particle interactions](https://docs.parcels-code.org/en/main/user_guide/examples/tutorial_interaction.html) easier to implement.
```

> Key improvements of Parcels v4 are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Key improvements include:
```

1. Support for [unstructured grids](https://docs.parcels-code.org/en/main/user_guide/examples/explanation_grids.html).
2. More flexibility in writing Kernels (including [using python functions in Kernels](https://docs.parcels-code.org/en/main/user_guide/examples/tutorial_gsw_density.html) .and support for writing output in a Kernel)
3. Support for [user-defined interpolators](https://docs.parcels-code.org/en/main/user_guide/examples/explanation_interpolation.html).
4. More robust and flexible support for [nested grids](https://docs.parcels-code.org/en/main/user_guide/examples/tutorial_nestedgrids.html).

> We have also changed the [output format to `parquet`](https://docs.parcels-code.org/en/main/getting_started/tutorial_output.html#reading-the-output-file), which is a tabular format and therefore more efficient and flexible for storing large datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have also changed the [output format to `parquet`](https://docs.parcels-code.org/en/main/getting_started/tutorial_output.html#reading-the-output-file), which is a tabular format more suited for writing and reading trajectory data.
```

See the full migration guide from Parcels v3 to v4 [here](https://docs.parcels-code.org/en/main/user_guide/v4-migration.html).

> Note that Parcels v4-preview is not a stable release yet, and we are still working on improving the performance of the framework and adding new features. We welcome feedback from the community, and encourage users to try out the new version and [report any issues or suggestions](https://github.com/Parcels-Code/parcels/issues).

Author: TODO: Add link to new performance tutorial here

> Note that Parcels v4-preview is not a stable release yet, and we are still working on improving the performance of the framework and adding new features. We welcome feedback from the community, and encourage users to try out the new version and [report any issues or suggestions](https://github.com/Parcels-Code/parcels/issues).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that Parcels v4.0 is an early release to gather user feedback and should not be considered stable. We welcome feedback from the community, and encourage users to try out the new version and [report any issues or suggestions](https://github.com/Parcels-Code/parcels/issues). Once incorporating this feedback, improving performance, and implementing a few outstanding features, we aim to release a stable version of Parcels.
```

> Funded by the [WarmWorld ELPHE project](https://www.geomar.de/en/research/ongoing-projects/project-details/prj/376612?cHash=449a07d057ea0d890287bd2b8ca26e8b) funded by the German Federal Ministry for Research, Technology and Space (BMFTR) and the [NWO Vici project “Tracing Marine Macroplastics by Unraveling the Ocean’s Multiscale Transport Processes”](https://www.nwo.nl/en/projects/vic222025), the development of Parcels v4 started in September 2025 and was a collaboration between the [GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel](https://www.geomar.de/en/), [FluidNumerics](https://www.fluidnumerics.com/) and the [University of Utrecht](https://www.uu.nl/en) in the Netherlands. The development was led by Nick Hodgskin, Joe Schoonover and Erik van Sebille, with contributions from many others, including Willi Rath, Daniel Lizarbe, and Michael Denes.

Author: Anyone else we missed?
